
--- FILE: W8. Writing and ethical considerations.pptx ---
Slide 1:
1
4/8/2026
Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations
Slide 2:
4/8/2026
2
4/8/2026
Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations
Before designing a proposal, plan the overall structure or outline of the topics and their order
The structure of a proposal varies depending on the project design
The proposal should follow good writing practices to ensure a coherent research proposal or project that is easy to read.
In addition, special attention should be paid to good ethical practices, and anticipating potential problems
Slide 3:
4/8/2026
3
4/8/2026
Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations
Regardless of the type of proposal, its contents should provide a coherent picture of the entire project
Joseph A. Maxwell
(2013)
Problem Framing and Objectives
Relevance
Research objectives
Research question / hypothesis
Purpose
Theoretical
Practical
Research Methods and Data
Data collection
Methods and instruments
Anticipation of Problems and Ethical Issues
Theoretical
Practical
Slide 4:
4/8/2026
4
4/8/2026
(General) Structure of a Quantitative study
The structure of a quantitative study follows the model of an introduction and literature review, methods, results, and discussion.
Introduction and Literature Review
A
Statement of the problem (the problem, theory, existing literature on the problem, gaps or deficiencies in the literature, and the relevance of the study for different audiences)
Purpose of the study
Research questions or hypotheses
Methods
B
Population, sample, participants, and participant recruitment
Type of research design(e.g., experimental, survey)
Procedures(procedures and variables, instruments and materials, ethical considerations)
Data Analysis Procedures
C
Appendices
D
Instruments and materials
Study timeline
Budget
Slide 5:
4/8/2026
5
4/8/2026
(General) Structure of a Qualitative study
In qualitative research, there is no single dominant structure. However, guidance presented in several general frameworks can be helpful.
Introduction
A
Statement of the problem(including existing literature, gaps or deficiencies in the literature, and the relevance of the study for different audiences)
Purpose of the study
Research questions
Philosophical assumptions and/or worldview
Procedures
B
Research design(e.g., descriptive, case study)
Role of the researcher
Data collection processes
Data analysis processes
Proposed narrative structure for reporting findings
Validation strategies
Ethical considerations
Expected Results, Impacts, and Significance of the Study
C
Appendices
D
Interview questions and interview protocol
Observation forms
Study timeline
Budget
Slide 6:
4/8/2026
6
4/8/2026
(General) Structure of a Mixed Methods  study
Introduction and Literature Review
A
Statement of the problem (deficiencies in previous research, the need for both quantitative and qualitative data, and the understanding gained by combining or integrating both datasets)
Purpose or objective of the study(the overall intent to collect and combine quantitative and qualitative data)
Research questions and hypotheses
Quantitative research questions or hypotheses
Qualitative research questions
Mixed-methods integration questions
Philosophical assumptions or worldview and theory
Literature review(typically includes quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods studies and demonstrates the need for a mixed-methods study)
Methods
B
Definition of mixed-methods research and justification 
Mixed-methods design
Design diagram and validity challenges in the design
Quantitative data collection(ordered according to the design)
Quantitative data analysis
Qualitative data collection
Qualitative data analysis
Integration statement and joint display
Resources and Skills Required to Conduct the Research
C
Potential Ethical Issues
D
Appendices
E
Slide 7:
4/8/2026
7
4/8/2026
It is useful to establish the discipline or habit of writing regularly and continuously. 
For this purpose, the use of drafts is very valuable.

You gain perspective when you return to the study after a short break.
An intermittent writing process often disrupts workflow (“weekend writer”).
Continuous work on the study means writing something every day or, at the very least, being involved daily in the processes of : thinking, gathering information, and reviewing.
Set writing as a priority and make it a daily activity, regardless of mood or motivation.
Write when you feel most alert, during the day or at night.
Avoid writing marathons. Write in small, regular amounts.
Schedule writing tasks so you work in specific, manageable writing units during each session.
The Habit of Writing
Slide 8:
4/8/2026
8
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Each paragraph should be a single unit of thought, a package of ideas made up of closely related sentences.
The basic building blocks of any intellectual or research argument are paragraphs.
Effective access to justice in Colombia faces multiple challenges.
For example, a recent study by the Center for Studies on Law, Justice, and Society (2016) suggested that 45% of Colombians living in rural areas must travel more than 20 kilometers to reach a judicial office. In addition, the World Bank (2019), in its annual report on access to justice, highlighted that only 30% of municipalities in Colombia have extrajudicial conciliation centers, which limits access to alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
Overcoming these barriers through improvements in judicial infrastructure and the implementation of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms is essential to guaranteeing access to justice, thereby laying the foundations for a more equitable and effective system.
Despite advances in legislation and judicial reforms (DNP,2025), people continue to face significant barriers when dealing with justiciable problems, both from objective and subjective instances (OCDE, 2016). From an objective perspective, these barriers include a lack of relevant and accessible mechanisms for conflict resolution.
How to write paragraphs in research texts (articles, books and PhDs) | Writing for Research
Slide 9:
4/8/2026
9
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Each paragraph should be a single unit of thought, a package of ideas made up of closely related sentences.
The basic building blocks of any intellectual or research argument are paragraphs.
The initial topic sentence alerts readers to a change in topic or focus and indicates, through signposting, what the paragraph is about.
It should never be linked to the material that came before (all links are made forward, in the closing sentences).
Be careful not to begin paragraphs with linking words such as “However,” “Nevertheless,” “Moreover.”
Topic sentences should clearly signal a new focus of attention.

They should give readers a sense of a smooth and “natural” progression of thought.
A very brief indication or naming prompt, not a mini-guide or an advance summary of the entire paragraph’s argument.
Slide 10:
4/8/2026
10
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Each paragraph should be a single unit of thought, a package of ideas made up of closely related sentences.
The basic building blocks of any intellectual or research argument are paragraphs.
The main body sentences present the central argument of the paragraph. In research writing, they should:

Clearly explain reasoning
Describe results
Develop implications
Clarify formulas
Elaborate and explain theoretical and thematic points
Body sentences constitute the main flow of the paragraph, the core of the unit of thought.
Slide 11:
4/8/2026
11
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Each paragraph should be a single unit of thought, a package of ideas made up of closely related sentences.
The basic building blocks of any intellectual or research argument are paragraphs.
Evidence sentences may be distributed throughout a paragraph, interspersed among body sentences at points where they are most necessary or useful. Evidence includes:
Examples
References
Citations from other authors
Supporting facts
Exhibits, tables, graphs, or diagrams.
Evidence sentences are inherently digressive: they have the potential to interrupt the main flow of the paragraph.

Therefore, they require careful management, especially when two or more evidence sentences appear consecutively without intervening body sentences.
Slide 12:
4/8/2026
12
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Each paragraph should be a single unit of thought, a package of ideas made up of closely related sentences.
The basic building blocks of any intellectual or research argument are paragraphs.
The closing sentence serves to:

Pull the paragraph’s argument together
Make clear to readers that a building block has been established.
It should be:

Constructive and substantive
Add value to the argument, rather than simply repeat earlier material.

The closing sentence should also manage any necessary transition to the next paragraph.
Slide 13:
4/8/2026
13
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
Starting with a 
backward-looking 
link to the previous 
paragraph
Beginning with a 
“clarifying” 
sentence
Starting withquotations and/or references
Abrupt breaks caused by length
Overly long paragraphs
Overly short 
paragraphs
Starting with a backward-looking link to the previous paragraph
Readers may conclude that this is simply “more of the same” and move on to the next paragraph. Even those who persist may become confused:
What is the paragraph about?
Is it the first sentence?
Or is the real point the now “submerged” topic sentence that appears second?
Beginning with a “clarifying” sentenceor some other formal or insubstantial statement.
Examples include opening by discussing:
a caveat
a definition
a difficulty
a methodological issue that belongs to the background of the argument rather than its core.

As a result, readers may fail to correctly identify the topic sentence, and therefore the closing sentence becomes unjustified.
Starting with quotations and/or references
When the first words of a paragraph are the name of another author, the writer inadvertently signals: “What follows is a completely derivative paragraph”(or section, if the pattern is repeated). To avoid this:

Write a clear and independent topic sentence.
Explain the central ideas or propositions of one or more schools of thought in the body sentences.
Relegate authors’ names to supporting references at the end of sentences.
Abrupt breaks caused by length
This commonly occurs when evidence sentences multiply: a brief, planned presentation of an example or the analysis of an exhibit becomes too long, breaking the paragraph’s flow.
Overly long paragraphs
Paragraphs extend beyond the acceptable range for research writing, which is typically: 100–200 words and may reach 300 words or more.
Overly short paragraphs
In research writing, this occurs when a paragraph has: fewer than 100 words, especially when it consists of a single sentence or fewer than 50 words.
Slide 14:
4/8/2026
14
4/8/2026
Clear and Concise Writing
It is important to develop editorial skills
Eliminate unnecessary words(while retaining essential ones)
Eliminate the passive voice(by using the active voice)
Reduce qualifiers and value judgments
Reduce the excessive use of citations, italics, footnotes, and parenthetical comments.
Regarding Voice and Tense
Use the active voice as much as possible in academic writing.
There is a common practice of using the past tense to review the literature and report results of previous studies
Future tense appropriately indicates that the study will be conducted in the future and is a key tense used in research proposals.
Use the present tense to add clarity to a study, especially in the introduction.
Active Voice: The researchers identified significant barriers to access to justice. They implemented programs to build new conciliation centers.

Subject  + verb  +  direct object

Passive Voice : Significant barriers to access to justice were identified by the researchers. Programs were implemented to build new conciliation centers.

Subject  + passive verb phrase + agent complement
Slide 15:
4/8/2026
15
4/8/2026
Ethical Considerations
In addition to conceptualizing the process of writing a proposal or research study, it is necessary to anticipate ethical issues and design strategies to address them.
Before Conducting the Study
Follow the standards of professional associations.
Obtain approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) or equivalent ethics committee.
Obtain local permission from the research site and from participants.
Select an appropriate research site.
Minimize the research burden placed on participants.
Consult the code of ethics of professional associations in your field or discipline.
Identify and seek local ethical approvals when required.
Select a site where the researcher can remain objective and has no personal or professional conflict of interest.
Use brief and appropriate instruments, test the acceptability of data-collection procedures, collect data at convenient times, and offer compensation for participants’ time when appropriate.
At the Beginning of the Study
Disclose the purpose of the study clearly.
Do not pressure participants to sign informed consent forms.
Respect the norms and procedures of social groups(e.g., Indigenous communities).
Be sensitive to the needs of vulnerable populations(e.g., children).
Identify participants’ needs through a needs assessment or informal conversations.
Contact participants and inform them of the general purpose of the study.
Inform participants that they have the right not to participate or to refuse to sign the consent form.
Data Collection
Respect the research site and cause minimal disruption.
Ensure that all participants are treated equally.
Avoid deception of participants.
Do not “use” participants by collecting data and then abandoning the site.
Avoid collecting information that may be harmful to participants.
Build trust and clearly discuss the anticipated level of disruption when gaining access.
Clearly explain the purpose of the study and the intended use of the data.
Avoid biased questions, refrain from expressing personal opinions, do not disclose sensitive information, and involve participants as collaborators when possible.
Provide incentives or compensation, when appropriate.
Adhere strictly to the questions established in the interview or data-collection protocol.
Slide 16:
4/8/2026
16
4/8/2026
Ethical Considerations
In addition to conceptualizing the process of writing a proposal or research study, it is necessary to anticipate ethical issues and design strategies to address them.
Data Analysis
Avoid taking sides with participants.
Avoid disclosing only positive results.
Respect participants’ privacy and anonymity.
Report multiple perspectives.
Report contradictory findings.
Assign fictitious names or aliases and develop composite participant profiles to protect identities.
Reporting, Sharing, and Storing Data
Avoid falsification of authorship, evidence, data, findings, and conclusions.
Do not plagiarize.
Avoid disclosing information that could harm participants.
Communicate in clear, direct, and appropriate language.
Share data with others when appropriate.
Store raw data and related materials(e.g., procedural details, instruments).
Do not duplicate or fragment publications.
Provide full evidence of ethical compliance and absence of conflicts of interest, if requested.
Indicate who owns the data generated by the study.
Report findings honestly.Use composite stories to protect participants’ identities.
Use bias‑free language and avoid discriminatory language.
Provide copies of reports to participants and stakeholders, and consider distribution via a website.
Refrain from using the same material for more than one publication.
Disclose research sponsors and those who benefit from the research.
Give proper credit for intellectual ownership to researchers, participants, and advisors.
Slide 17:
4/8/2026
17
4/8/2026
Ethical Considerations
Nudge FORGOOD
Fairness   (Equity / Justice)
F O R G O O D
Openness
 (Equity / Justice)
Respect
(Autonomy, dignity, freedom of choice)
Goals
(Well‑being, the individual knows best)
Options
(Alternatives)
Opinions 
(Public perception, attitudes)
Delegation 
(Conflicts of interest, capacity to nudge)
Delaney
(2020)